+++ 
date = "2018-06-21"
title = "Data Transparency in an Un-Private Internet"
slug = "data-transparency" 
tags = ['Big Data']
categories = []
+++

The information age has revolutionized the way we interact, communicate
and are perceived. In the United States, [approximately 90 percent of
the population is on the internet](http://www.internetlivestats.com/),
using Facebook and Google to catch up with high school friends and to
answer their questions. Companies such as Google constantly collect data
on search habits of the user and what they like, in order to provide
more personalized results and to improve their company.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*VidPRvmFocz_R7HDSVx0ZA.jpeg)

Data collection and the selling of this personal data has been a topic
of controversy lately, primarily due to the Facebook and Cambridge
Analytica scandal. In the 2017 hit Sci-Fi movie The Circle, the main
character Mae obtains a job at a company eerily similar to Google,
called the Circle. The company created a social network paralleled to
Facebook called True You, and is constantly creating new software and
products that revolve around collecting copious amounts of data because
“Knowing is good; Knowing everything is better.” As the film nears the
end, the Circle knows everything about anyone and can track a person
down in under 20 minutes. While being greatly exaggerated this shows the
potential of what improper use of data can lead to, and begs the
question should we allow access to people’s private data in order to
improve our personalization of services we use or even to the government
in order to increase national security? The proper use of data can
greatly improve products and make our lives easier, however, we, as
consumers, deserve the right to know how our information is being
collected and used.

Every time we sign up for a new web service we must accept a Terms and
Conditions contract. This agreement is full of legal jargon and
extremely unreadable to the average consumer and needs to be changed in
order to be easier to read and comprehend. In a study conducted by
[Jonathan Obar and reported about by
NPR](https://www.npr.org/2016/08/23/491024846/do-you-read-terms-of-service-contracts-not-many-do-research-shows),
the researchers created a fictitious social networking site and wrote a
Terms and Conditions for it. With statements such as all information
will be passed on to the NSA and that you would have to surrender your
first born child to the company. Only 1 out of 500 participants
expressed concern about the NSA and nearly 98% of participants said they
did not even notice the first born child clause. Practically no one
reads the Terms and Conditions (26% in this study skimmed the documents,
the rest did not read it at all) part of this is due to their length,
according to Obar “It would take the average user 40 minutes a day to
read all of the privacy and terms of service policies”, but also in a
large part due to the readability of the text. In fact, a [2014 survey
found
that](http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/12/04/half-of-americans-dont-know-what-a-privacy-policy-is/)
52% of internet users incorrectly believed that “‘When a company posts a
privacy policy, it ensures that the company keeps confidential all the
information it collects on users’”. Initially, this is surprising yet
thinking about it more, the poor readability of many terms and
conditions contracts leads to a gross misunderstanding of what the
company can do with your information. In order to gauge just how hard
the terms and conditions agreements are I calculated the SMOG (a
commonly used formula to calculate what level of education is needed to
comprehend a text) score for Apple’s contract, the contract scored at 14
years of education. Meaning that you would need to be at least in your
second year of college in order to fully understand what you are
agreeing to when you sign up for an Apple product. With the average age
when kids get their first mobile device is 12.1 years old it is
impossible for them to have adequate education in order to properly
comprehend what they are, often blindly, agreeing to.

Countries such as Canada and European Union’s recently passed General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) legislation are taking steps in order
to improve Terms and Conditions and data transparency. Canada has the
[Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents
Act](https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-protection-and-electronic-documents-act-pipeda/p_principle/)
(PIPEDA) which focuses on keeping companies accountable for personal
data usage management, limiting collection and use, accuracy, and
individual data access among a few. The GDPR was just enacted into law
in mid-April 2018 and will be applicable on May 25, 2018. This law aims
to give the data back to the consumers, by requiring specific data
consent and carefully regulating companies commodification and selling
of personal data. According to an article in the [Harvard Business
Review](https://hbr.org/2015/05/customer-data-designing-for-transparency-and-trust),
25% of people did not know that companies can collect location data on
them. However by enacting laws such as the PIPEDA and the GDPR
governments are making a huge step towards data transparency by being
more open about the data they collect, how they use it and allowing
consumers to see the data collected on them. Ultimately laws such as
these will allow consumers to be more knowledgeable of the extent of
their personal data.

The United States has an estimated 286,942,362 users online yet
according to the [Council on Foreign Relations
article](https://www.cfr.org/report/reforming-us-approach-data-protection)
the

> “U.S. lacks a single, comprehensive federal law that regulates the
> collection and use of personal information. Instead, the government
> has approached privacy and security by regulating only certain sectors
> which [in turn creates] overlapping and contradictory protections”.

The recent GDPR law is the most comprehensive data protection to the
U.S. has to date, and it’s a European Law! The GDPR is changing the way
many U.S. based companies are handling customers data since companies
like Snapchat, Facebook and Google are also present in Europe. This has
prompted many companies to change their terms and conditions in
compliance with the new law. In fact, over the past week, I received at
least one email daily notifying me of the changes a given company was
making based on the GDPR rules regarding data transparency and use. The
fact that a European law has more control over U.S. companies data
standards is absurd and should (but probably won’t) trigger a law being
passed in Congress.\
Before a potential bill is passed it must be brought to attention
through the public agenda and on the matter of data transparency, this
is seemingly difficult. In 2015 Almost [¾ of Americans are reluctant to
share their data with business because they want to maintain their
privacy](http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/05/20/americans-views-about-data-collection-and-security/)
and that “93% of adults say that being in control of who can get
information about them is important”. Yet there is a gross
misunderstanding of how consumer’s data is collected and used. While
most people gather that companies are collecting data on you, [no more
than 25%
know](https://hbr.org/2015/05/customer-data-designing-for-transparency-and-trust)
that search history, communication history, and IP addresses are
specifically collected. This is the challenge, most consumers do not
know just how private the data is being collected on them actually is.
For example in mid-2015, 85% of Americans say they trust their credit
card companies with personal data, yet in 2015 according to [ID Theft
Center 2015
report](http://www.idtheftcenter.org/images/breach/DataBreachReports_2015.pdf),
there were 71 data breaches in the banking, credit and financial sector.
The average American consumer does not know the reach of their own data
or how it is used, let alone when it is being misused. This is a problem
because data transparency is necessary in order to properly regulate
large corporations use of highly sensitive and personal data, yet many
Americans do not see this as a problem. On the FCC’s (which regulates
the internet) website, for example, you can look at all the complaints
filed by consumers, and privacy over data is not even in the top 5, it
ranks below unwanted calls and telemarketing. Clearly, it is not a large
concern in the U.S., and this can be mostly attributed to consumers
simply not knowing the poor practices in the industry.

The current state of data privacy in the U.S. is extremely closed off
and will continue to be until a majority of consumers say something
about it. Terms and Conditions agreements are getting ever more
unreadable, even as they are updated in order to comply with new data
regulation laws. And overall consumers are in the dark about how their
data is collected and used, not even knowing the basic types of
information collected about them. As companies and their software become
even more intrusive (especially with advancements in artificial
intelligence and machine learning) privacy over personal data is going
to become a primary concern. However without a nationwide call to
action, nothing is going to be done, these giant companies have immense
lobbying power and without a significant backlash, they will continue to
improperly use personal data.

By [Lucas Kohorst](https://medium.com/@lucaskohorst) on [June 21,
2018](https://medium.com/p/8179805f70e7).

[Canonical
link](https://medium.com/@lucaskohorst/data-transparency-in-an-un-private-internet-8179805f70e7)

Exported from [Medium](https://medium.com) on March 5, 2020.
